Pauline, would you be kind enough to just tell me where you were born and where you were?
I was born in Islington, yes, right in the middle of London.
But we moved fairly soon when I was, well my younger sister was born there, so we must have
been there at least four years. That's okay, so your parents did what? What did they do for a living?
My mother was from Edinburgh and my father was from London and he joined the RAF, but not
a young man, he was a cabinetmaker. But he was in the First World War, a sergeant,
and he was in the British Expeditionary Force that was sent over there before the war was declared.
And he said strangely enough there were men over there fixing Rolls Royce engines
to German planes and they were working when war was declared, but they had to finish it in order to
be paid. So you know, it's strange isn't it really? So this is at the beginning of the First World War?
No, this was the second book because he was on the reserve, and so he was in the British
Expeditionary Force and he didn't get back till after Dunkirk, we thought we'd lost him,
and it turned out that they couldn't get to the beaches, so they were going south all the way
and they were traveling at night and hiding in the day in in orchards right through France,
and he managed to get back in rags. It took some while, I don't think we know how long it took
before he got back. I wish I'd asked him, but you didn't think of it then. You're young, you're full
of your own life, and of course I was in the Air Force, so yes I wish I'd asked him about it.
Did he remain in the, you know, as a member of the armed forces then throughout the war?
Yes. Right, okay. So what did he do after he'd come back?
Well he went back, he did a bit of work for different firms, but he had ill health
and he retired soon afterwards.
And so you were brought up in Islington?
No, I wasn't brought up before, so we moved to Hyham Road in Tottenham,
and a neighbor there was an arsenal player, Bob John, and I got friendly with his daughter, Joyce,
and he was ever such a nice man, Bob John, and we used to go, they lived about two or three
doors away from us in the same block of houses, and in those days I don't think they went and
trained like they do today. They used to train at home, and he was always skipping, and they had a
sort of a paved area at the back of the house, and we used to have our skipping ropes, and we all,
the three of us used to skip together, so, but then there was the recession. My father lost his job,
and my mother had to sell the house, it was always in her name, had to sell the house,
and we moved to Southgate, North London, and we lived there, and then the war came.
We had a landmine that landed at the side of us. We were a little joining road with two houses
either side of the road. It was a link road, but two long roads, and then
and then one day this landmine, I was actually on leave. When I used to go home,
the first thing I'd do was have a hot bath, because it was, there were very difficult
circumstances there. That was when I would be at Horn Church, I think. You had to walk to the
bath house, quite a walk from where we were billeted, and you had to take your towel and that,
of course, there were never any plugs there, but we found that if we wrapped a handkerchief around
a penny, that worked as a plug, so you could have a bath, and of course nobody ever cleaned them.
So, but so of course as soon as I got home, I have a hot bath at home, and while I was in the bath,
this landmine landed on the link on the road that ran to the side, and a terrible crash, of course,
and it blew in, it blew in our front door, it smashed the side window, we had a side window
on the stairs, and my mother called out, and of course, no, we had put, couldn't put the lights
on, because the blackout had come down, and she said, be careful you come down, there's broken
glass on the stairs, so of course I wrapped the towel around me, and I managed to get down without
doing much of an injury of anything, and of course it wasn't till daylight, when we looked out,
because the front door was blown off, I don't know if it was blown off or blown in, I think it was just
blown in, and when we looked out, there were the row of houses at the side there, and it was like
a gap in a tooth, two of them had gone down, one of them was the men were at war, it was just the
wife, and I think it was just one child, and they'd taken cover under a thick oak table,
and they survived, the whole house had collapsed on them, but they survived, but the couple on the
next house, oh I don't know how many there were there, they didn't, so yes that was a bit of a shock.
Yes, but you left school and you became a draft woman, is that correct?
Well I was working to begin, before the war started, or had it just started,
at standard telephones and cables, I don't know if you've heard of the firm, and of course in those
days you had lots of tracers, it was a building, the whole top floor, at one end there were the
draftsmen, and at the other end the tracers, there must have been about 20 tracers, and of course
the idea of course was that we would trace the drawings and do all the printing, because
it was almost illegible their printing, so we had to make a really decent job that then could be
copied and sent to the workshop or whoever was going to make something, and of course we were
on war work then, it must have been the war it started, and because I know I was working on
air conditioning for a warship, well of course the draftsmen as I say, although it was a risk
they could stay, but they were joining up, you know they felt they had to go and do their bit,
so of course they were losing all their draftsmen, so they chose five or six of us,
the better tracers as they put it, and we were being taught draftsmanship, well
I got well into the course, I hadn't quite finished it, and then my husband who was in the Air Force,
he came home on leave because he was going abroad, what should they call it,
there's a name for it, but anyway, so he had a fortnight's embarkation leave, that was it,
wasn't it, so I asked if I could take my, that was around about February I think, no January,
I know it was in the middle of winter, so is this 1941 perhaps, or? 1942, beginning of 1942,
and I asked if I could take my summer leave, you know to spend it with him, and it was refused,
so I took it anyway, and when I went back I was given the sack, so unbeknown to me,
the other draftsmen that were there took it up with the Union, I didn't even know that I could
do anything like that, so they took it up with the Union, and I had to go before a panel of elderly
men, very sympathetic, you know, that my, we'd just got engaged actually, so my fiance,
all the story you know, and they decided that it was unfair, dismissal, and I could go back,
but in the meantime I'd got myself a job at COSAS as a draftswoman, they were just grateful to get
anybody who had any idea, but I wasn't allowed to take it, because then I was conscripted,
I was kept waiting I think for five weeks until my conscription came through,
and that's how I went into the Air Force, looking back though, it was such an interesting time,
I'm glad I did go into the Air Force, because I found it was so interesting, I was very lucky.
Your fiance at that stage, he was aircrew?
No, he wasn't, he volunteered, but he was signals, he used to, he had to learn Morse code,
and he used to listen out and take down, you know, from the Germans and that sort of thing,
take down and then of course somebody else.
So he was a ciphers officer?
Yes, well yeah, and after three and a half years he got leave, he came home for a fortnight,
we got married, special licence, and then he went back to Egypt, he was in Egypt,
he'd been all over the place, Mold, Thuron, Sicily, anyway.
Okay.
So that was that.
So you entered the RAF, you presumably were posted somewhere for basic training?
As a plotter.
But you were posted for some initial sort of basic training first of all?
Oh yes, Innsworth I think it was, where we used to go, it was an enormous, you were
kitted out with your uniform there, and then you were interviewed to see what sort of work
you'd be suitable for, and they decided I'd be a plotter. So I was doing that for about,
I don't know, six months, but a while anyway, and that was at Horn Church,
and we had a draftsman there who had his own office, and he was mad on table tennis,
and there was a table there for quiet times or rest times, and he just wanted to play table tennis.
He was there, and of course it must have been on my papers that I'd had drawing office training,
so I was approached and said, would I like to be his assistant in the drawing office?
So I said, well yes, you know, it sounded interesting because I always enjoyed drawing.
So I was there for about a week or a fortnight, I can't be sure now, and he was posted overseas.
They wanted to get rid of him because he was never there, he was always playing table.
So of course I had my own little drawing office all to myself.
So he had a good wall.
I don't know what happened to him. I really don't know whether he survived,
but I suppose he annoyed them because he was never in the office, and of course I did all the work
that came in that was painting the plaques that used to go around the ops room, hung on a rail
that went round, and all the different squadrons that came, you had to put the number, you know,
321 or whatever it was, and of course they were always changing, so that meant repainting them,
and then they decided that, because I mean, I did my best, but they varied, they weren't always the
same figures, so I had to make templates, draw them out, and then they were sent over to the
workshop and they made them, so I had them, the stencils, so they all looked identical with the
figures. That was one thing, and then of course, because when I was at Horn Church,
they decided they wanted a bigger plotting table because it only covered a smaller area,
and so I had to make the,
we've built it at Horn Church, and then there was a coach that used to drive us in, the different
crews, into Romford, and at the back there, there was a very big building that had belonged
to, well, it would come to me later on, and so I spent ages making this bigger table, I know it
it came from the wash down, it just included the Isle of Wight, and it took me ages to do,
and then almost as soon as I'd finished it, they decided to close Horn Church,
and we were all moved to North Wales, but of course, I was in the drawing office there,
we were at Blake Hall, which was a lovely country house, away from the
airfield for obvious reasons, it looked like a sort of farm, it was a big building,
and I had one of the front bedrooms as my drawing office, which was very nice, and it had a sink in
it for washing my instruments and things, so that's where I stayed until the end of the war, at Blake
Hall. I mean, when you were at Horn Church, and indeed at North Wales, I mean, those were very
active fighter stations, both of them, and we had our mess right on the edge of the airfield,
and we could see the planes going off, and very often we'd stay there, this was when I was a
plotter, we'd stay there and try and count them as they came back, and you know, so often they
didn't all come back, it was very upsetting, and of course you've got to know them, some of the pilots,
yes, and can you remember the squadrons that were there? I can't, there were so many of them,
because they were always changing, we had a Polish one, I know we had a Polish, all Polish,
now that's an interesting story, because all the Poles were tall and slender and quite elegant,
they always liked to press their uniforms a certain way, very particular. Now when I was at
North Wales, getting towards the end of the war,
we had, they'd been rescued, there were a lot of Polish girls, and they,
I feel uncomfortable saying this, but they were the peasant type, nothing like the men, the pilots,
they were all about five foot tall and about five foot wide, like peas out of a pod, and they had come,
because they didn't know any English, and they were in the mess, the dining room,
and because they didn't know anything, they didn't know what to do, and I tried to be helpful,
I got my schoolgirl French, which wasn't much use, but at least I was trying to help them,
and they were so grateful, and sort of almost sign language, would I visit them that evening,
when we were all off duty, and it was suburb time, I remember, lovely sunny day, and we had,
we were in these long huts, an entrance, both ends, and we, all ours, were in what was called
the rookery, because there were trees there, it was all disguised really, because the rocks
used to nest in the tops of the trees, so where we were, were called the rookery, well I went to
their huts, and as I say, there was an entrance at both ends, and I was knocking on the door,
I could hear chatter going inside, so I knew they were all there, and I tried to push the door,
wouldn't open, and I was bagging away at it, and suddenly one of the girls came out, oh no,
it took me to the other door, they've got a shrine built at the end there, and I was near,
I almost knocked it down, but you know what, they didn't wear their shoes inside,
they were stocking feet, and the lino, it was that thick brown lino, it was like glass,
it was polished, I've never seen nothing like in our huts, and they were so friendly, they were
lovely girls, but we were trying to sign language in a way, but of course unfortunately,
all they could do was clean, because they used to clean all the latrines for the Germans,
when they were prisoners there, so that was all they could do, which I felt so sorry for them.
Now you also contributed to Air Sea Rescue.
Oh yes.
So can you tell us about that please?
Well that started off by the magazine that John Armstrong brought me to read, and then it was an
article about Air Sea Rescue, and it was primitive, it was in the early days,
so I, because I had already done my stint, because I had a squadron leader come, I think they,
he'd heard that I'd made the plotting table, so I was used to doing tables, and he came and
interviewed me, and said the sort of thing that they needed, explain what was wanted,
and could, I think I could do it. I said well I have a go, and it took me ages, because
there had to be a table for the North Sea, and another one for the English Channel,
and you had to, it consisted of, there were several, I can't remember the names now of these
stations, dotted around the 11 Group, it was all 11 Group, and they were different colours,
red, blue, green and black, and I had to calibrate each one,
the four of them, all round this table, it was a large table, oval, and it had, it was thick rubber,
and the paint was cellulose, it was actually called salamal at the time, that was the makers of it,
and it had to be calibrated, all the degrees, all the way round, and of course each one had to be
calibrated differently, and then if a signal came from a downed pilot, it could be picked up by
several of these stations inland, and then it was done by triangulation, you know, they all
came together, or went out together, until you pinpointed where the downed plane was,
so they were, I had to take them down to Swingate near Dover, and they were positioned in the
control tower at Swingate, and they were very successful, because after a while I had to go
back and touch up the paint, the paint was wearing off because of the wear, so they were
very successful, so it must have saved a lot of lives. Indeed, indeed, yes. So well. You have
weighted strings as well. Oh yes, yes, that's right, because there were holes drilled through
these stations inland, and it was called a mouse for the general shape of it.
It was lead heavy, so it would drop through, and because there was another thing that held it on
the top, and then of course that's when they got the signal through, they'd pull it out,
and that was where it crossed over the sea, that would pinpoint where the plane had gone down,
or whatever. Yes, it actually reminded me of Rod. So this would have been about 1944,
45, towards the end of the war. It would be 43 possibly. 43, oh gosh, there was a lot of
activity. It might have been later, you know, and of course you dare not record anything, you know,
because it was treated with suspicion if you were making notes of anything,
and it was only a need to know sort of business.
Yes, yes. Now you mentioned earlier on that you had designs to become a pilot yourself.
Yes, that was towards the end of the war. Right.
But having passed the medical and the interview, the war was coming to an end, so
as I said, my son said, what a good job, I didn't get it because I've got no sense of direction.
All right, wonderful. So when did you finish with the RAF? When were you demobbed?
When my husband came home, I applied to be demobbed, and we've been very happy down here.
So you moved here, it sounds as if it was about 40 years ago, about 35, 37 years you've been here?
Yes, something like that, for a long time. Yes, on VE Day we were all confined to camp
because they were concerned that there might be a last attempt for the German, the Luftwaffe,
to fly over and put all their bombs on, as the last gesture I suppose. So we were confined to camp.
When I wrote a letter which was printed in the radio times,
and I've still got the letter, I can show it to you, a girl got in touch with me, she was in the
army, but we had a small contingent of army there, because when our guns were firing they wanted to
know where we were, where we were firing, so we had a small contingent of army there. And
she'd read my letter and she wrote, read my article in the radio times, and there was enough
of my address for her to contact me, she sent me a letter and she said I remember that,
us being confined to camp, because I mean a lot of people wouldn't believe it,
VE Day everybody was out celebrating and we were confined to camp.